# Pavol Luptak

_**Monero & Cryptocurrencies as the Most Powerful Liberalizing Tool of Global Opportunism**_

[https://youtu.be/clCcuAIaAz4](https://youtu.be/clCcuAIaAz4)

---

_**Pavol:**_ This presentation should be about the tax slavery. If you want to opt out of the system, if you want to opt out of the tax slavery, firstly you have to realize you are a tax slave. So the question is, you should ask: "Am I a tax slave? How did I become tax slave? Do I feel comfortable in the position of slave?"

You should know that taxation is always involuntary and taxation is not only paying like an income tax for example, but it means paying mandatory health or social insurance which is not insurance but like a health care tax. And you should know that usually when you were born you became tax slave by very often by your citizenship, for example, if you are the US citizen or a citizen of Eritrea. And if you’re a Czech citizen, for example, or Slovak citizen, you have to be like a tax slave somewhere. So you have to be tax resident somewhere. If you’re like a Czech or Slovak or European resident and you are traveling all the time, every two days you visit some different country. So basically you don’t stay anywhere, so you don’t have center of interest anywhere, no residency anywhere. Your home country, like an issuer of your passport will usurp you and you become tax citizen of Czech Republic or Slovakia.

So this is really important to say: most people in the world they have to be tax residents somewhere, and there are some specific rules. But fortunately even if you’re a tax slave you can still choose the best suitable tax master. So one important information you have to be a tax slave somewhere. But as I told you, now we have excellent possibility to choose your good, it’s a bit paradox, but still you can choose a good tax masters.

Firstly, I would like to talk something about the magic period of six months or 183 days, because usually when you stayed in any country of the world more than six months or 183 days, some countries it’s even less, like the US for example, Switzerland, you are automatically becoming tax resident of the given country. So the given country usurps you as a tax resident. You should know this information and if you don’t want to be a tax slave of any country, you have basically two options. One option is move all the time, like me, for example - I don’t stay anywhere more than three months, for example, I’m like a full perpetual traveler. The other option is just to live, for example, from crypto loans. There are a lot of Bitcoin, I’m not sure about Monero, collateral loans. So basically if you live from loan, you don’t need to pay taxes, you don’t need to pay insurance.

One important information: we live in a global apartheid, because all people in the world are discriminated based on their birthplace. So depending when you were born, you have your citizenship, you have your passport, and you can travel just to some specific countries you are allowed to. If unlucky people born, for example, in shitty countries, with a shitty passport, usually they never can leave their home country and achieve dreams, their dreams in a better countries. So I have for example many friends from Iran and if you are from Iran you basically you’re stuck and you cannot visit most countries. And what is quite sad is that the most states, most countries, they accepted this global apartheid and they call it business policies.

But maybe you say, okay, but this visa policy, this global discrimination of all people based on their citizenship, it’s like a collective decision because we are protecting ourselves against dangerous immigrants and dangerous crimes committed by these immigrants. But this is like a bullshit. This is like a fabricated government bullshit. And if you don’t believe me, there is like a great book which is called "Open Borders" from Brian Kaplan, the guy, and even if you respect for example some property rights, you should know that thanks to the government, immigrants cannot physically come to your private property and work for them because they need like work visas and a lot of permissions.

So if you want to have the most personal economic freedom, now this looks like a quite simple or basic, you should have like a good card in your wallet. Good cards means you need to have a good passport, you need to have a good national ID, you need to have a good card to be able to open the bank accounts, for example, in the good country, to move freely. Because if you don’t have good cards in your wallet, so we are from Iran or you are from Central African country, you are stuck - you cannot move freely, you cannot open the bank account, you cannot drive, you cannot do business. So the question for this presentation is how it is possible to obtain the best cards on the market? And now we are moving to the question of becoming a global opportunist.

You should know that good citizenship or good passport is a commercial product. And it’s normal that rich people, they used to buy this commercial product like citizenship. The passport is basically proof of your citizenship somewhere in some countries.

The best passport in the world is EU passport from Spain. You can buy a Spanish passport. It’s quite expensive. It costs half a million euros. So mainly rich Chinese people and Russian people can afford to buy this expensive Spanish citizenship. The second best EU passport is from Malta. And this passport is even more expensive. It costs up to 700,000 euros. Really a lot. And then you have a few cheaper options.

So the best non-EU passport is, according to my analysis, Saint Kitts and Nevis, which cost about $200,000. Basically, you have to invest your money to some government fund or you have to buy some property, you can sell this property after seven years. And if you need some good and still cheap passport, I recommend you Saint Lucia, which costs about $100,000. And if you have no money, but you have a lot of time, a lot of energy, the cheapest option is to obtain Brazilian passport, because when you have Brazilian citizenship, you just need to move to Brazil for one or two years. Have a baby in Brazil. Doesn’t matter with who. Just move to Brazil, have a baby - your baby automatically obtains citizenship of Brazil - and when you leave her, at least one or two years, as his or her parent, you can ask for Brazilian citizenship, which is part of this Brazilian naturalization process. So these are the second option, but you have to pass language test, language exam from Portuguese. So you have to speak Portuguese, at least on basic level.

So maybe many of you, you can ask, okay, do I really need a second citizenship? If you have EU passport, probably not. Basically second citizenship provides you a better legal protection. For example, when your home country decides to revoke your passport, and they want to report you back to your home citizenship country, you can still have the second passport, for example, so you’re still legally somewhere, and they cannot deport you so easily. So maybe I should mention the case of Snowden. Basically Snowden was traveling, I think, from Hong Kong to Colombia, and Colombia to Ecuador or Bolivia, and he was traveling via Moscow, via Russia. And when he was in Moscow at the airport, Americans, American government decided to revoke his US passport. And then basically he became illegal tourist in Moscow, so that’s the reason why he’s stuck in Moscow. Not because he wanted to be stuck in Moscow, but because Americans revoked his US passport. And if he had a passport, for example, of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, or any other country, he could continue to Bolivia or Ecuador, and basically Russians could not arrest him as an illegal immigrant.

One important information - usually your citizenship doesn’t define your tax residency. So tax residency depends usually on the place where you stay majority of your time, like more than six months, or where you have center of your interest. And center of your interest is defined by your residency, usually permanent residency. So basically, maybe I should mention you, there is like a big phenomenon which is called birth tourism. So in basically all North American, Central American, South American country, there is like a principle which is called citizenship by soil. So when you have a baby in the US, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Prague, your baby automatically will obtain the citizenship of the given country just because he or she was born in the given country.

In Europe, or most European countries, we have the principle we just call citizenship by blood. So it means you inherit your citizenship from your parents. So for example, if you are an EU citizen, it can be a good idea to have a baby in America. just to use benefits of this birth tourist.

Last time when I was in Argentina in Buenos Aires, I saw like a thousand and thousand Russians, like a female tourist, pregnant, female pregnant tourist that were traveling to Buenos Aires to have a baby. So ultimately their babies became Argentinian citizens and they, as their parents, they can immediately obtain permanent residence in Argentina, which is not a good deal, but still better than living in Russia.

So as I told you, temporary or permanent residency defines your central interest and also basically depends your tax residency too. And that’s what is important for you. So you should definitely avoid permanent residencies where you have any duties associated with this residency. Like for example, European residencies. Like a Czech residency or Slovak residency or any European residency. Which means when you are like resident of Czech Republic, Slovakia, you have to pay a whole floor insurance, social insurance, you have a lot of duties and you don’t want to. You want like a good residency in a country with no duties at all.

So I personally prefer residency with no or territorial taxation and still there are many countries with territorial taxation, almost all countries in Central Europe, in South Americans, in Paraguay, no tax residency countries, for example, Dubai. So I have the residency, now I have residency in Panama, which is taxed, a very taxing country in Paraguay, and I’m in the process of asking the residency in Uruguay.

I’m going to explain to you why I still think that Paraguay is probably the best and cheapest residency for digital nomad, because you don’t need to stay there majority of your time. And you can still be tax resident of Paraguay, you can enjoy benefits of territorial taxation of Paraguay. And what is quite cool immediately when you receive national ID of Paraguay, which is called "cedula", you can register at the tax office in Prague and they ask for the driving license of Prague and they basically provide you something what is called tax certificate. So you will have your tax residency somewhere. So for example when you travel a lot, your home country cannot usurp you and cannot just say: "Hey, you will be our tax resident because you don’t have tax residency somewhere else".

And the process is quite easy. You can do it in three days, usually in one, two days. What is interesting about Paraguay, also like Georgia, for example, these two countries, they didn’t send CRS. You know what is CRS? Raise your hand if you know CRS. CRS basically means Common Reporting Standard. So financial institution of crypto exchanges in countries which did not sign CRS, they don’t do automatic reporting. So they don’t say any sensitive information, for example, that you have a bank account or crypto account in this country to your tax residency country.

Paraguay is also considered to be like a tax paradise in South America because there is 10% tax for local income and 0% tax for foreign income because it’s a territorial taxation country. VAT is also very low, like 10%. It’s a core member of MERCOSUR, which means that using your Paraguayan cedula without your passport, you can visit Uruguay, Brazil and Argentina. And now we are basically building a community in Paraguay, crypto community, Bitcoin and Monero funds.

And now maybe I should mention benefits or some more information about other options, good residences with zero or three-year taxation. Also a good destination is Panama for example. The problem of obtaining a permanent residency in Panama is that you have to invest $200,000 and buy some local property in Panama or you have to be employed in an existing Panamanian company for the first two years.

The other option is Uruguay. The problem of Uruguay for digital nomads is to obtain the permanent residency in Uruguay. You have to stay there first two years, majority of your time, at least six months every year.

And the third option, very popular, is Dubai. The problem with Dubai is that you have to also basically live in Dubai, or you have to visit Dubai every six months, and keep your residency just by doing business. So you have to be an employee of some existing Dubai company, or you have to create your own Dubai company. So these are some other options.

And now the question is how you can do business when you are a tax residence in Dubai, Panama, Prague, Uruguay, how you can do business inside of the Europe Union or basically anywhere? If you are non-U.S. citizen or non-US tax resident, you’re probably quite lucky because you are not like these global tax slave. And in this situation, the best what you can do, you can create something what is called USLC disregarded company. And this USLC disregarded company, it works as a proxy. So basically, you can use this company to issue invoices anywhere out of the US, for example, to your European customers or Asian customers. And then the tax duty of this USLC company, is transformed from this US LLC company to the tax residency of the owner of this company. So if you’re a Paraguay or Panamanian owner, the owner who has tax residency in these countries, this tax duty is transformed to Paraguay or Panama. And as I mentioned before, in these countries, you don’t need to pay any taxes from foreign income. So when you have income from this USLC company, and you own this company as a Paraguayan or Panamian tax residence, doing business out of the US, you basically don’t need to pay any taxes. Which is like a really popular scenario for many digital nomads.

You can also, I strongly recommend you not to use bank accounts. With the bank accounts, it’s like with the regulation, the best bank is no bank. The best regulation is no regulation. But unfortunately, many people cannot afford to be Monero or Bitcoin only. They still need to have use like bank accounts. When you have these USLC companies, you can use companies like mercury.com or wise.com. But if you can afford it, just stay in Monero, stay in Bitcoin then you receive a lot of freedom and especially when you use Monero you receive even a lot of privacy. This is pretty obvious but I would like to mention that being full crypto means no bank reporting, no stopping and freezing your transactions, no stupid questions, no stupid questions from any third parties, authorities, crypto exchanges or banks.

So when you have no bank account and you do business purely using crypto, number of your possibilities where you can create company significantly increases. Because for example, if you create a company in Panama, which is a 32 taxation country, even for companies. So basically Panamanian companies pay zero taxes for non Panamanian income for an income. It’s fine that you create Panamanian company, but it’s almost impossible to open the bank account for Panamanian company, even in Panamanian banks, physically in Panama. So, but if you stay in crypto, you use Monero, for example, for a Panamanian company, you can use any crypto or any currency for your Panamanian company. Then you don’t need to care that you don’t have a bank account and you can still use Panamanian company, for example.

So Monero is definitely the best liberation tool here If you have to have any bank account you should definitely prefer banks in non-serious countries especially for example, Georgia is now super popular regarding banks you can open the bank account in Bank of Georgia or TBC banks. Georgia’s crypto friendly that is one of the most crypto friendly country in the world so basically you pay zero percent taxes if you’re tax resident of Georgia. And if you are a digital nomad, you have many options like crypto codes. You can top out with the Bitcoin Lightning for example. Still not with Monero, but with the Bitcoin Lightning, which is pretty good. Like Xapo.com for example.

And if you travel a lot, you definitely need to care about your physical privacy. For example, me personally, I use recent Google Pixel 7 Pro flash it with a Graphene OS, you probably know Graphene. If you’re super paranoid, there is a banana phone, which is Nokia 81004G. In this phone, you can easily crack it or hack it and change your email, your physical device identification. It’s illegal in the EU, so don’t do it, but that’s the option. I prefer anonymous SIM cards.

So basically you have two big options. The first option is Silent Link. You can buy, I think even with Monero, you can buy an anonymous eSIM. The second option is keepgo.com, which can be paid by Bitcoin. So you can have anonymous SIM card. For example here in Czech Republic it’s still possible to buy anonymous SIM cards, and they’ve worked perfectly in the in all European countries. Now the best option is called O2 SIM card for Ukrainians residents in the Czech Republic. You can buy it completely anonymously and you have like a 15 gigabytes for 10 euros - nothing. I strongly recommend you these options.

And then if you travel a lot and you need some good data. You can also use like a non-anonymous KYC SIM cards. For example, I use Paraguay Claro. If you’re a US citizen or you stay majority of your time in the US, you can use, for example, Google Fi.

So we are going to the end. The global opportunities may look like this. So you have like a EU citizenship or you have Canadian citizenship. You have no residency in the EU. So one important information - it’s really good to be EU citizen, but it’s definitely a bad idea to be EU resident, especially tax resident. So you want to be EU citizen, but just visiting the EU with no duties, with no tax residency. The best permanent or tax residences, for example in Paraguay, Dubai, Panama. To do business, you can do business using USLC, disregard the company in Florida, Wyoming for example. Don’t use bank accounts if you can afford it. So prefer Monero or Bitcoin Lightning all the time. And then if you have to use bank account then create your bank account in non serious country like a Georgia, for example, Paraguay. If you want to use like a crypto card The best option is probably xapa.com Because in sapo.com you can set up your tax residency in Paraguay or Uruguay or Panama and it works perfectly. Don’t pay the local state health care insurance and instead of the instead use international health care provider for example I use William Russell and use anonymous SIM cards like a silent link for example of Keepgo using Bitcoin.

That’s all. Ah, one important information - don’t support by your taxes corruption and victimless crimes because when you pay taxes in Slovakia or Czech Republic we used to say, any person who pays taxes support local corruption. And definitely nobody of you wants to suffer local corruption. And especially victimless crimes. In Slovakia, we used to arrest and put to jail people for marijuana for 15 or 20 years, just for possession of marijuana. And as a taxpayer, you definitely don’t want to support these victimless crimes. So become free, become the global opportunist. Thanks a lot.
