# andrea

_**Regulating Monero: A Libertarian, Strategic Analysis**_

[https://youtu.be/vf6zb-2dYf0](https://youtu.be/vf6zb-2dYf0)

---

_**andrea:**_ Before starting the talk, I just want to thank all the organizers and the volunteers for the amazing job that they have done so far to make this amazing conference possible. So really, thank you for your job.

Today I'm going to talk about regulations from a libertarian and strategic perspective. Just a couple of words about myself before I start with the talk. Basically, my background is in philosophy, and right now I work as a philosophy and history teacher. I'm also a libertarian, as you will see later on in this talk of the anarcho-capitalist and agorist variety. I'm also a member of the Monero Policy Working Group which is basically a loose quorum of individuals that try to understand the impacts of regulations on Monero and sometimes also provides some very good public material in order to foster the public discussion about regulation. The Monero Policy Working Group is free for everyone to join, so if someone wants to engage with it, it's more than welcome. And importantly for this talk, I'm also not a lawyer, not a policy maker, not a computer geek, and not a technical guy. Basically, I'm just a normie, which I think that is kind of useful for this talk, because I want to tackle the issue, the very complex issue of regulations from the perspective of a common user.
So a quick summary of the presentation. First, I will do some KYR, which means know your regulators, just to show that there are a lot of regulators out there. Then I will distinguish between two kinds of regulations. First of all, regulations that are just an extension of traditional financial regulations, and then malicious regulations that target the value proposition of cryptocurrencies like Monero. Also, I will spend some words about blockchain analytics companies, which are private entities that play a huge role in shaping the regulatory environment that we live in, and it is important to understand the role of this kind of players. And I will end with some strategies that we can adopt in order to defend ourselves from these regulations.

So with regard to Know Your Regulator. Of course we have all in mind this kind of image of shadowy super-regulators. Regulation is a very complex topic. There are a lot of different parties and actors that make the laws that regard also Monero. Of course in Western democracy we have national parliaments that hold the legislative power. There are also national agencies, like for example in the US, the FinCEN, OFAC, SEC, which are all unelected agencies and bureaucratic agencies, and that play a huge role both in shaping regulation and in enforcing them. And also there are intergovernmental agencies, supranational agencies, maybe the most famous for the Monero community is the Financial Action Task Force, which is responsible for providing the guidelines with regard to anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism. And then these guidelines are implemented by national governments in different jurisdictions.
And also, quite an obvious point, but there is a difference between draft legislation and actual legislation. We should always keep in mind this difference, which is something not obvious if we look at our Twitter feed or at clickbait website, like for example, Coindesk or Cointelegraph is not a law.

And also of course there are private players that work for profit obviously, and they try to lobby regulators in order to pass laws that give them some kind of advantage. This is the case for exchanges for example or blockchain analytics companies as we will see later.

So let's start with the first kind of regulations. Well, so Satoshi is a very important person for crypto enthusiasts, but he didn't invent money and he didn't invent the financial system. The financial industry is basically a centuries old industry and therefore there are already a lot of regulations in place and actually the financial sector is probably the most regulated sector in all the economy, at least in the West.

So it is only natural if you put yourself from the perspective of a government to want to try to extend these regulations also to a newborn industry like the crypto industry. This is the case, for example, for regulations against financial crimes, quote unquote, like money laundering or tax evasion. It is the case for security laws that deal with investor and customer protection. It is the case for regulation of money and banks. And a very important point, maybe the most important point with regard to these kind of regulations is that most of them target businesses that conduct activities on behalf of their customers. So it is important to understand that these regulations target intermediaries, third parties, and of course there are consequences also for users, for users like us, but their main target is these third parties. So please keep this in mind because I will come to that in a couple of minutes.

I think that with this kind of regulations, there is not much to see here. Again, if you put yourself from the perspective of the state, why shouldn't you want to regulate crypto banks or crypto intermediaries in a similar way as you regulate other kinds of financial institutions? To be very clear, I'm not defending these kinds of regulations. Actually, I think that they do a lot of harm and they do more harm than good and that they are responsible a lot for the financial crisis that we are living nowadays, but still if you are a government you just want to regulate also the crypto industry in the same way that you regulate the traditional financial industries.

And also, let's face it, that most people that use cryptocurrencies don't really understand the value proposition of cryptocurrencies, and they treat them just like investment to make more fiat money, and therefore, they just expect and demand the state protection of their money and assets deposited at financial institution. Again, I'm not defending this kind of approach, but this is just a reality of what's going on out there.

So, how should we react to these kind of regulations? So, first of all, we need to understand the value proposition of cryptocurrencies, and in particular, the fact that there are two main features of cryptocurrencies that we need always to keep in mind, which are, of course, privacy and ownership. There is a required reading about privacy, which is very important, of course, the Bitcoin White Paper, and in particular, section 10 of the Bitcoin White Paper, where Satoshi is very clear defining privacy in a different way, from what happens with the financial system, privacy in Bitcoin and also in other cryptocurrencies is defined first and foremost like pseudonymity.

On blockchain you have a lot of data and metadata that can be read by everyone, that are there for everyone to see, but this data is not related immediately through a real world identity. And it is important to understand that the traditional financial system is meant exactly to break pseudonymity. All the KYC stuff, for example, the KYC requirements for example, sign up for an exchange, are meant exactly to break pseudonymity and to attach real world identities to data that is on the blockchain.

Also, cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Monero are not fiat money, are supposed to be something different from them. Fiat money, the fiat system, of course, is a system of credit and debt. Basically, there is always some kind of counterparty risk. For example, your money deposited at the bank means that you are a creditor of the bank and that the bank is basically your debtor. But cryptocurrencies are not like fiat money, are not supposed to use through third parties, through counterparties and through intermediaries. Are just more similar to gold and silver in this regard. Bitcoin, Monero, gold, silver are something that can be owned exclusively without asking permission to anyone.

So how should we react to this kind of regulation? Well, we need to understand what cryptocurrencies are and we need to use them appropriately. And therefore, we need to avoid, as much as possible, the use of custodial services. So really, just don't use them unless, of course, it is really necessary to do that. Of course, this is not a solution for all the problems that come from regulations. But given the fact that traditional regulations target mostly third parties and intermediaries, it solves a lot of problems.

Moving to the second kind of regulations, we can see also that regulators try to also attack the value proposition of cryptocurrencies. This is the case, for example, for regulation that try to dry liquidity out of digital cash. Think, for example, about the more or less formal or informal pressure on third parties to provide services related, for example, to privacy coins like Monero. Or think about regulatory attacks against the use of privacy-centric crypto tools. An example of that is the OFAC sanction against Tornado Cash. If you want to dig into this question you can watch at Monero Talk interview that we had with Doug last year. And then of course regulatory attacks against privacy.

I will just give you an example of this third kind of attack and I just want to provide you with a quote by Christine Lagarde, which is of course the head of the European Central Bank and this quote is on privacy and the digital euro. Of course it's not directly on Monero but this kind of quote shows pretty well the malicious approach to privacy in the crypto ecosystem. So she states that "in our public consultation, 43% of respondents rank privacy as the most important aspect of the digital euro, well ahead of other features". And so we, as the ECB, will do whatever it takes to protect privacy, but - there is always a catch in this kind of claims - "but full anonymity - such as offered by cash - does not appear a viable option in my opinion". Why? Because of course full privacy and full anonymity enables crimes, and you don't want to be criminals, so you should give up full anonymity.I think that this kind of statement is really a malicious attack against some of the value proposition of privacy preserving cryptocurrencies like Monero. And I think this is because they are a form of double-speak. Double-speak of course is a term invented by George Orwell in "1984" and basically means the use of language to subvert reality. For example, the Big Brother in "1984" states that "War is peace, freedom is slavery, and ignorance is strength". It's a sort of propaganda mantra that is meant to subvert reality.

And basically what Lagarde is saying is that privacy means being visible to regulators. We had a very beautiful talk this morning that showed that this is definitely not the case, that privacy means to be invisible by default, means to be able to choose voluntarily whether to reveal information to some people and that therefore invisibility should be maintained by default and visibility is just a choice of the single individual. What Lagarde is stating in this statement is just the opposite. She's saying that basically there needs to be some kind of back door thanks to which basically regulators can see transactions that happen in the economy, but in some particular cases we should protect privacy, which is the exact opposite of what privacy is. Privacy is being invisible by default and not visible to regulators by default. So this is an example of a malicious attack.Also, with regard to another very interesting issue, with regard to regulation. We have blockchain analytics companies, which are basically private entities that work for profit and that play a huge role in shaping these regulations. Basically, they can be understood as governmentalities. Governmentalities are just private entities that work for profit and that perform some state action. In this case, of course, they try to follow funds, to track funds that are visible on a transparent or on public blockchain. I think that the work of blockchain analytics company is a clear example of cronyism, of corporativism and of a bad mingling between the state function and the private function.Basically, blockchain analytics companies provide tracing software to government agency, regulated entities, law enforcement and so on. They provide tracing software and not identification software. Remember that blockchains are meant to be pseudonymous and therefore the most they can do is to follow funds on public blockchain, but if they end they are able to identify users only if they have third party information, for example, KYC information. So it is very important to understand the role of KYC in all of these kinds of regulations.

So blockchain analytics companies try to track funds that are on public blockchain through heuristic assumptions, but heuristic assumptions we all know that are just assumptions, are just educated guesses. We had another talk this morning, a very beautiful talk, that showed that the most common assumption among blockchain analytics companies is that common input assumption can be broken even for transparent chain like Bitcoin through, for example, conjoined transactions. So all their assumptions, it is important to understand that, can be broken and nevertheless they sell their services to law enforcement agencies, regulated entities and so on and so forth.
Also, these companies provide KYT software, which is Know Your Transaction software, which is closed source and which is non-deterministic and basically its function is to flag what it deems to be a suspicious transaction. So the problem is that this software is basically obscure. Users cannot know which criteria are adopted to flag transactions. And therefore, there is a lot of danger here, because this kind of software, this kind of evidence, quote unquote, can be used by, for example, by law enforcement to put people on trial, to make people appear in court, or to put people in jail. So all this is done through this obscure software that people are not able to verify. And of course, they sell this software for profit to governments. And I mean, we should really question this kind of business model both from a legal perspective and from an ethical perspective.So basically the relationship between blockchain analytics companies on the one hand and the government on the other is a relation of scamming the scammers who longs to be scammed So what do I mean with that? Basically, of course the state is the mother of all scammers. Of course, it is the only institution on earth that can survive by stealing other people's property and by making this theft appear beautiful and legitimate. On the other hand blockchain analysis companies provide skewed software, closed source software that is based on educated guesses and often they promise something that they cannot really realize. Think, for example, a couple of years ago, one of the major blockchain analysis companies claimed on social networks to be able to track all Monero transactions and, of course, they didn't provide a single evidence for that. But in this case, blockchain companies sell their services to governments and we need to understand in my opinion that the obscurity of the software is a feature and not a bug from the perspective of law enforcement and of the government. It is a feature and not a bug.
Basically, I think that government agencies, more or less, at least someone in the government agencies know that this software is somehow flawed or really cannot do what it promises to do. They know that and nevertheless they use it exactly because it is obscure. This means that basically the public prosecutors or law enforcement agency or regulatory entities enjoy a very big advantage over common users and over common individuals. Basically they can charge people, they can accuse people using evidence which is not really well understood and in this way they can basically shift the burden of the proof on the users to prove her innocence. So it's a very dangerous point.

So what can we do in order to try to make the situation better? Well, the first strategy is to try to lobby regulators. There are some organizations that do it right now. For example, Coin Center is a very good organization. It is a no-profit and tries to shape the discussion, the public discussion about regulators in a good way. They try to nudge regulators in the right direction. Also more informally, this is also the objective of the Monero Policy Working Group.

Of course, we should also face the possibility that this kind of lobbying doesn't work. And so, what is our Plan B? Of course, our Plan B is not the stock to flow ratio, but is to remember our origins. And of course, here we are in Parallelni Polis and near the Institute of Cryptoanarchy. So it is important to give a couple of quotes from the cyberpunk manifesto. So, Eric Hughes, talking about cypherpunks, states that cypherpunks write code and that "we don't really much care if you don't approve of the software that we write". Remember that privacy-per-center cryptocurrencies like Monero are supposed to be used in a permissionless way. And also, of course, we have Timothy May who states that, of course, the government will try whatever it takes and will try to stop the spread of crypto anarchy, but still they will not succeed. So there is some hope in this regard.

And I want to conclude with the last slide, a very, I think, Polish and elegant and measured slide, which is this one. And we should really understand that in the end Monero should be understood as Fuck You Money. Of course, it's not the original Fuck You Money, this is Bitcoin, but maybe Monero will be even better than Bitcoin in this kind of money.

And importantly, don't take me wrong, I think that this is very, very difficult to live up to this expectation. And there is a lot of pressure on us. If we go outside and we ask some random people that maybe know Monero for being tied to criminals, well, we know that most people think that what we are doing is something like enabling crimes. So there is a lot of pressure on us and maybe we can be seen as the bad guys of course. And it is not easy to withstand that pressure.

But on the other hand, we shouldn't make the mistake of overestimating the control and the power of the government. Remember that the government, by definition, is an institution that tries to get away with marketing incentives which makes the state an inefficient actor. And I think that the work that the people that are developing Monero right here, right now, and that are in this room, are making a very good job in trying to exploit these inefficiencies of the government. So, thank you for your job, and also thank you for having me.
