# Ben Biedermann

_**Pseudonymity Is Not Enough: Why Monero ‘misses out' on Decentralised Identity**_

[https://youtu.be/dGSBn7lIpyk](https://youtu.be/dGSBn7lIpyk)

---

_**Ben:**_ Hello everyone. Today I saw it in the chat, who is this guy, Ben Biedemann, can you come to the stage? So clearly I'm new to this community, and one reason why I tried to find you and why I'm here is because I'm frustrated. For close to two years I've been working in publicly funded projects on so-called "decentralized identity" or "self-sovereign identity". And I've been frustrated with a couple of things, because pseudonymity was not taken seriously, but really it was about control. And the Monero community has not been living under a rock for the past five to seven years, clearly because we've heard it today in the morning that we need to prepare, or some of us want to prepare, and want to opt out.

Now, this all created somewhat of an identity crisis, because I didn't belong or I didn't feel like I belong. And there we already are — identity. Identity is not just a technical concept. It's not just something that we implement and pilot. It's something that we feel here. And that's why I'm here today. But I want to talk about the technical side as well because in the end — here we go — in the end, it's a social concept. And it's a social technology if we think about how we conceptualize identity and how we bring it into tech.

Now, some of you — do I have a pointer? — some of you may have seen this kind of prison outlay or ground plan. It's the panopticum. So basically, the concept that you introduce social control by making the subjects aware that they are being controlled. This doesn't need someone watching in the middle all the time. It is enough that someone in the cell thinks that he or she is being watched.

So which implications does it have when we talk about eIDAS, when we talk about decentralized identity, when we talk about digital identity in general, and introduce it to a community, to a society? What kind of implication does it have if we talk about publishing view keys on a large scale? Do they need to necessarily monitor every single transaction? No, it is enough that we know that we're being controlled. So that's why social technology is a technization of new administrative powers and authority that subject us, that subject the individual, but also the collective.

Now Monero shares some properties with my actual background. So I'm a small island states researcher. So I come quite from the social sciences. And we have this concept in small jurisdictions, small island studies, it's called "peripherality". So what it means is that there is some distance to the center, and clearly Monero isn't the top one cryptocurrency being used. So there is some degree of peripherality to the big chains, to Bitcoin, to Ethereum. Yet Ethereum and Bitcoin, they're driving all the demand and they're driving all the demand in decentralized identity. So we need to use this to our advantage. Because if the big players are into decentralized identity, if big money is coming in and funding public-private partnerships, developing solutions that are not privacy oriented, then we're pretty much going to lose out. So we can use peripherality to our advantage, because we can create a safe haven. We can use it to try out different things. We can experiment, because we are not so closely watched as may be developments in the Ethereum, but so-called Web3.

So we see that Bitcoin has a decentralized identity method. It's called "did" method. We have Ethereum. We have Solana. And what they do is they persist identities on public ledgers. So you really write your identity, your metadata to an identifier that is persistent. Because once you've transacted, there's no way to detach it. And even more the most prevalent implementations store your metadata on IPFS. Well, you can encrypt it, and you can take all kinds of measures to minimize the impact, but it's still persisted there.

So we saw around maybe five, six, seven years ago that something called the Hyperledger Foundation forked Ethereum and created a standard to store metadata in a certain way. And they called it anonymous credentials. And they used similar technology to Monero. And what they did, what it created is you could have identity data that has some reference to a distributed ledger, but that is not traceable. So basically, what they did is they disconnected the persistence of the identity data from the encryption of the session. And the Hyperledger Foundation and the technology drove a lot of use cases, piloted within the European Union, within the US, within Canada. So British Columbia, for example, was pretty big on decentralized identity and has an implementation. But then something changed and we heard it in our previous talk. So eIDAS was referenced.

So eIDAS is basically a framework, a trust framework, of the European Union where they set out a bunch of rules, how you can perform digital signatures, how you can prove that you are yourself, that you can do KYC. And it's getting renewed. So eIDAS 2 is introducing a digital identity wallet. Now, this digital identity wallet is something that is vague. It's not quite clear or not until recently it was not quite clear what kind of technology goes in there, how self-sovereign it is going to be. But what came out is in round about February, that's not decentralized at all. Because it follows a lineage of measures of control.

So I think around the 1990s, 2000s, we got all these fancy chip cards called identity cards. And you had some cryptographic material on it, you even have today. And you could pass a border electronically, they could scan this chip and you could even perform in some countries electronic signatures. And then recently the International Standards Organization issued something that's called an MDL, a Mobile Driving License. So it just took the card to the next level and put it on the phone.

And now the European Commission is updating their eIDAS regulation called EIDAS 2. Nice. Fancy catchy name, and they're going to use this standard. So national identity schemes are supposed to be a prudent approach. Or people who have worked on these schemes, at least call it this way.

So what you have — you have a hardware secure module in a Java smart card, which is encrypted. And it can be misused. I mean if you hold, for example, your passport at an electronic border gate, so like this fancy thing where you scan your passport and then you go through this gate and they scan your biometrics, well, it uses cryptography. No joke. So they're going to scan your face, measure your eyes, and measure your forehead, and hash this and compare it to a hash that is stored on this card. And you even can identify yourself online. So if you perhaps want to sign a contract, you could potentially use this to, well, I mean, perform a qualified electronic signature. So prove that you are really you.

But there's a caveat. Because they disabled it in a lot of specifications, where the specifications set out that it shall not be used, because what they really want to do is they want you to go to a service where you upload all your identity documents, your documents you want to sign, and these services want to make money, and they can process your data. So you have a high degree of centralization just because someone decided even that we have the capability of these identity data, it should not be used for you to be able to design a contract decentrally.

Now, when we talk about eIDAS, we take this on the next level. We take this on our mobile phones that are, well, surveyed, that are not really secure, that listen what we say, what we do, that monitor us. So the Mobile Driving License introduces a new set of cryptographic measures and combines it with existing measures. So while we saw in a previous slide that they warn about this kind of cryptographic algorithms and operations being used to track someone, they now say: well, it provides better privacy than performing a signature over data that you present. Well, that's true, but why do you introduce either of these measures? So why do you give either of this option if at the end of the day, all what you want to do is track this person owning a Mobile Driving License?

Now, I can understand that in a context where you operate a vehicle that a police officer might want to make sure that you were not arrested or your driving license revoked because of drunk driving. But if you do this to an identity document that is general purpose, that every one of us will own, then we have a problem, because they can just revoke the identity document and they can track us every single step on the way.

So a couple of people at the IETF, so the Internet Engineering Task Force, like were provided with this problem and were said: well, we had this solution back then from the Hyperledger Foundation. So they kind of developed the standard, and now we kind of want to do the Mobile Driving License. So please provide us with like a privacy preserving way of presenting claims. So claims are: “My name is Ben” in a structured way, encoded into the document itself. So what they did is they came up with salted hashes and kind of sold as the newest stuff, even though it's been around for quite some time. And they still say: well, we can do something about the claims. We can encrypt that your name is Ben, and you don't have to disclose that your name is Ben. But what we're going to do is we're still going to persist your identifier. We're still going to require you to disclose your public key and persist it in the document that you're going to present. And the key you use to present this document in a secured session is going to be the same one to which your identity data is persisted. So it doesn't really matter how salty this hash is, you're still doxed.

And then returning to the eIDAS regulation saying: well, we started out doing pretty anonymous credentials that were then kind of mixed up or got mixed up in this whole mobile driving license debacle, which is now being used to track every single one of us if we ever want to use an eSIM or open a bank account in the European Union, we're still going to want to specify how we actually get this identifier. Because the MDL, neither the MDL, nor anonymous credentials really did say something about the method how this identity is created.

So eIDAS came around and they said: well, we have all these privacy preserving ways of creating public keys. They can be generated decentrally, but no really. But what we want to do is we want to know every single person, every single time they present this credential. So they came up with something which is called a PID. It's a personal identifier.

So what they did is they took public/private key cryptography and persisted it on a personal level. So when you look in the architecture reference framework, so the reference for implementation, you're going to find a whole bunch of attributes that is going to be associated with your public key. So you have your current family name, you have your current first name, family name at birth, your current address, your place of birth, your date of birth, and this is all attached to a unique identifier that is written into the claim structure itself, into the credential and used to present these credentials. So there's pretty much no way around this, and you not or circumventing KYC.

So what can we do as a community to face this new reality? What can we do so that we comply without being complicit? We could come up with our own method that is privacy preserving and yet authentic. And we heard previously that we could use our view keys. But really I don't think it's a good idea to give away these keys and let them view our transactions.

So what we could do is we could rely on what the Bitcoin "did" method already trialed. So we could take a transaction hash that we create with our Monero addresses. And this transaction hash is somewhat persisted on chain. But all the metadata that we are going to associate with this identifier to prove our identity is stored off chain. And we could even make use of subaccounts or subaddresses within the Monero ecosystem that allows us to minimize the identity management overhead. And the great chance is, because the "did" in the eIDAS is persistent — you get it once, it is provisioned centrally, and then you keep it — we could enable key rotations. By doing this, we could permission how much of our transaction history, how much of our identity we present to verifiers. How much do we present to perhaps the Magic Fund when we apply for a grant, or how much do we want to show when we sign up for the Monero GitLab. So we can enable an authentic rotation of keys if we decide to do so, or we can just stay anonymous and basically not reveal our previous keys.

So it kind of abstracts away from the ledger level and it builds an architecture around it that could potentially look like this. So we have the Monero network in the bottom. We can still provide IPFS for the storage of institutional "did" documents, so of institutional identities, where we say: all right, there is a corporation that uses Monero identity to perhaps issue an employment statement or something. So we could still have this transparency, but everything that is related to end users to natural persons would be in a wallet. So that we clearly distinguish between the network level and the identifier management level without doing everything on chain. Because chains still persist our transactions, whether we are going to reveal them or not. They're still there. People might not be able to see them, but they're there. So perhaps we should, when we think about how we can have a competing approach that is close to our community values, how we can adhere to what is specified without doing everything here. So without risking persisting too much.

Now these are my references. I'm happy to get into the details. And I'm looking forward to your questions and remarks. Thank you very much.
