# anhdres

_**Welcome to the Garden**_

[https://youtu.be/l5P8YkDdQbU](https://youtu.be/l5P8YkDdQbU)

---

_**anhdres:**_ Let's see if this works. Yes, this works.

Hello everybody. I will be talking about Monero Garden, just like John said, Monero Garden is a project of mine that got funded by Monero CCS. It's basically a website at this stage, but it could be like a book or even an app or whatever, because it's just content. My idea with this was to provide a resource for people that that got interested in Monero in some way, by some point, and you could link to a particular page, and every page has one topic, and one illustration or one animation, explain it when you get there.

So, and what I'm noticing in my time since 2017 explaining Monero to people, especially to normal people, is that they end up falling into one of three categories. Right? Let's see. Perfectly.

Most people fall in the first category, which is how to use stuff how to send, how to receive, how to buy, how to save my seed. The second one is what you fall into afterwards, which is what is Monero, how it works, what is a blockchain, what is mining, and all that. How it works, it's for the nerds. The first one are the normies, the second one are the nerds. And the third one is more of the advocates. Why, why Monero? Why it's important, what it brings to the table. So today I will be talking about some loose pages of the "why" path.

Every page is set up like this, has a title that's supposed to sum up the concept of the page, and then some explanation. First is privacy gives us the chance of trying things out. What happens is that the first picture that comes to your mind, when you talk about privacy and about censorship, is like a government or a top-down super powerful being telling you what you can say or what you cannot say based on some speech law or ownership law or property law or whatever. And it's the most that I've seen, especially even in this community, discussed how to avoid that. How to counteract a big power that tries to censor us. But to me, more interesting is self-censorship, right? And it's more pervasive as well. It's tricky to get it right, because every time that we are being observed, we behave differently. And this has been proved many times.

This is the Ash psychology experiment. It's a very known psychology experiment. It has been done and replicated thousands of times which basically they take, in the original, I think they take seven people, and another next choice, like a Monero ring signature, they take seven decoys, one real participant. And they ask, they show graphics like that, like this one, and they say, okay, tell me which of the A, B, or C lines is equal to the target line. What they found is that if they made it and people to voice out their preference or their choice, and they leave the real participant at the end, the first six or the first seven say a wrong one, the real one complies with the rest and says the wrong one, even though it's very clear which one is the right one. Right? That happens a third of the time. So a third of the time on a very obvious right choice, we decide to follow the crowd, so to speak, by peer pressure. When you repeat that experiment 12 times in a row, that number rises to 75% at least once.

So what is this important? Because in many ways, we live inside of a kind of a Truman Show scenario, especially when it comes to money, but it's also when it comes to communications. We are being observed all the time. Increasingly and increasingly we are being aware of that and that is modifying our behavior and it's changing our choices, our personal choices. What I think, what I've seen on people that I know is even starts to modify the behavior when it's personal things, things that even they are not public or they are not shown by anyone, you start to lose track of what is actually you and what is the you that you perform to comply with others.

So without privacy, how much would you stop being yourself? And you may say, why is this important? If it works, just stop being yourself. Well, since we live in a society, or at least we try to live in societies, and we have been trying to come up with societies all the time, instead of living in the middle of the woods by ourselves, even though some people like that, you get things like the candy jar experiment. It's also called the "wisdom of the crowds". It's been also replicated by I think hundreds of years right now. But if you take individuals and you ask how many candies are in the jar, most of us will get it wrong. But if you take the media, the medium of all of our guesses, it's super, super accurate and it has been proven a lot of times.

So if the barrier to give out our own opinions to be able to choose freely thanks to privacy, is not protected we will end up doing these kind of choices, or our guesses will be wrong, because instead of saying how many candies we really think there are in the jar, we are going to say the number that we think everybody else want to hear. And when it's not about a jar, and it's about the decisions that we make as a society, that's even more dangerous.

Here we are talking about money here in Monero all the time. And the way that I understand money is basically like a battery to store our time. So if we are voting all the time with our money and we come to the conclusion after our experiments that anonymous voting is the best voting we have, otherwise it doesn't work, the right to be wrong in our own way will help us getting the right together.

So that's. First page. Let me get this just in case. Privacy regulates pressure. Okay, this gets a bit more tricky, but in life, like in nature, chaos, entropy tends to increase, right? We get more and more chaos all the time by things just being alive. But we, I mean, our brain is the most expensive organ in our body. The energy consumption that our brain takes is bigger than any other organ. So we have evolved to take shortcuts to make guesses and to try to minimize the amount of brain power that we waste all the time. Right, let me show you here.

And what happened is that since we find ourselves always in a chaotic situations, we evolved as well to seek order. Because we get bored very easily. So for example, people like to travel to Argentina and have fun. But once you have to live in chaos all the time, it gets very stressful for you, right? So everybody wants like holidays in Argentina and living in Switzerland or something like that or most people do. I know a couple of them that don't, which is weird. But we did the other way around. So what happened is that we seek order all the time. And one of the strategies that we come up during our society is to bring order is to centralize, right? So we delegate those decision making into central powers of some kind, even if it's just a person or an entity.

And what happens here when I say that regulates pressure is just like a mocha puck, right? So let's think that society works like this those top down orders that we set up so our lives get more predictable, so they are not that expensive connectively, so we don't have to think all the time what is going to happen tomorrow, is it going to like, the government is going to still exist tomorrow, now it's going to be all right, everything works fine, I can relax and think on some other stuff, right? So the way that we do this with rules, rules work like the coffee that you put on the mocha pot, right? If you put too much rules, or if you press too much, you make basically like a pack that is so dense that it doesn't allow for the steam of the coffee, the steam of the water to come through and make tasty coffee, right? So if you had an escape valve out there, it will just heat and heat and heat until it explodes. That happens a lot with societies that we build during times. If we make the rules too strict, We don't allow any of the financial decisions that everybody takes by individually in the society to find its way if you press too much and you don't have a escape valve the system explodes. Monero as a tool, as some others, we like to call it an opt-out tool just because of that. Because it allows some pressure to be released in the system continually so it doesn't explode.

It's a good thing because in a way, it's decentralizing economic strategies, right? So that's what I was talking about graphically. You live in a regime, for example, that has too strict financial regulations, and at the beginning, it looks fine, and it looks stable, and people like it. Because like, I know how much is going to be tomorrow, the exchange rate between this and this, but life doesn't work like that. So you press, you press, you press, you press, and you can see that it's tending towards down all the time, slowly, because it pays for the inefficiencies of the system with like fees that it tracks for every citizen all the time. So the podcast is smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller, until you can take it anymore and explode. I need to create the whole thing from scratch again.

With Monero and also related to what I've seen, I said before about the cognitive spend that we have, it looks stressful in the short term because people say: ah, it's volatile crypto, I don't like it, it plays changes, or I don't know how to do stuff. So they can never on the short term, but eventually when it gets adopted, it gets better and more stable in the long run because what is allowing for us and especially in my heart I think it's important because it allows everybody, not only the people that are brave, I don't care or that are willing to take risks, it lowers the barrier of entry for everybody else. Even the introverts or the shy people can use Monero and feel good about it. So it allows a lot of little financial experiments to happen and fail all the time. But the trend is up worse. So we get to a better outcome, to a better guess of the candies in the jar.

Privacy reduces crap in the world. It's another one. Okay. I found they are all related. I find that it's a very beautiful thing when two people can interact and switch something for each other, right? Freely. That is very nice because ideally you will be exchanging something that you have and you value for something that you value more. You can see here that actually in his heart he wants a star, so the one wants money, so he gets the star that he wants. This is how ideally the world would work. We exchange stuff that we want for stuff that we already have.

But related to the first idea what happens when we are being observed all the time — when we are being observed all the time, we start broadcasting or saying that we want stuff that we don't really want. Things that we think that everybody else wants, or everybody else wants us to want, which is even worse. And so we say: okay, it's not that bad. I'd rather have a star, but just have a square not that bad once. So we do that trade. While we're still trading what we have, our money in this time, our money in this case, which is our time. Our end turns out happening is that when you repeat that by millions of people, thousands of times, you end up with a lot of crap in the world that we don't need. It doesn't make us happy at all. Luckily, we still have the star inside. But what sometimes happens is that we tend to just have a square in there.

Privacy empowers everyone. This is related to the second one. I think that is important because… Let's say, I couldn't find like a definitive number on this because it's kind of like a soft definition by introverts versus extroverts. I think privacy also is good because in general, it levels the playing field of experiments and ideas that introverts can bring to the world. Because related to the cognitive effort that we make as well, we need both of them for the whole thing to work, we need introverts and extroverts someone speaking and someone actually doing stuff. Introverts are usually very good at focusing on problems that they see in the world and working on them until they solve them. But they are not that good at broadcasting them to others afterwards or getting funding, or in the case of a very open society, open in a way that you're always like transparently clear, it will happen that the people that are more shy are the ones that are more scared to voice their opinion. And when it comes to voicing your opinion with money, Monero helps with that.

So that's what I say, in a future when Monero is widespread, we won't need to shout to be heard. We can whisper and change the world.

And the last one is privacy keep us in charge. It's also related to the first one. Since we evolved so much to save as much energy as possible, we tend, we get lazy all the time. And what we call with our tools that we develop through time is to have a more and a more, not only efficient, but also predictable outcome of every action that we do. We like that, we find pleasure that, I don't know, the coffee that we make in the morning with our love machine doesn't surprise you and tastes like strawberry every morning or something like that. So we develop systems that gives us that adaptability.

Lately and more and more increasingly like AI, but it's not only AI, all the algorithms that we have decided for ourselves makes us very comfortable and we tend to love them even if we don't think we do. But they keep profiling us. And they will act as well as like a kind of invisible, but just like the people in the previous slide when everybody was looking at you. You won't notice, I mean, some people, especially people here will notice, but most people won't notice how much they are being shaped into what they don't want to be. Or at least what they don't choose because they have all the data points to make an inferior decision of what you are, and then shape it the way that they want. That's why it's important to have a layer of privacy, like for example, Monero.

So if we picture those systems as parasites that feed from the data that we give them, with a layer of privacy, what we do is just rob them of their food. So they don't disappear probably, but they just cannot grow that much or at least start to fade away or they get weaker. Right? And they will always be there. And it's just like when you talk about privacy, Monero that is not always not there, always not a hundred percent getting there all the time. It's like a cat versus mouse game. This is the same. It's like, okay, they will make the systems will make better and better guesses of what we are in reality and we try to shape what we want to be more efficient, not only as individuals but also as a society, but giving them not a perfect image of what we are, being able to opt out with the data that we give them and the data that we don't. The picture that they get first is a bit distorted, so it's not that clear. But then we have the room choose by yourselves.

It's important, this is important because we need to… we won't be happy no matter what we have if we don't have, if we cannot be ourselves, at least inside each of us, right? I like this quote that says "The ability to choose cannot be taken away — it can only be forgotten." At first I thought it was like: oh, this is so true, nice quote, I'm gonna use this for the end of my presentation. And with every time that I practiced this presentation, that very much, sadly, I noticed that, yeah, it's more like: I would love it to be true, but it could perfectly not be true if we don't protect and work in tools like Monero. With Monero, it may be true. Without it not. We are not alone. So that's my talk. Thank you everybody for your time.
