# m2049r

_**Monerujo: Quo vadis?**_

[https://youtu.be/KXRvFnJAeU8](https://youtu.be/KXRvFnJAeU8)

---

_**m2049r:**_ Oh no, it's dark.

The first point maybe is we have a table back there and everyone who comes asks how do you pronounce this? So now for the world it's Monerujo, which is the Esperanto pronunciation. But since we're all pirates, we can call it whatever we want.

This talk is about where are we, what's going on, as we heard, what's the state of affairs right now?

So right now we just released a new version with PocketChange, which I'll be talking more about later. We are regrouping a bit in the sense that we are figuring out how do we want to continue, in what form do we want to continue, and I'm not talking about as a team, but the direction of the app - design choices, do we want to support the new material design immediately, stuff like that.

It's been over a year without a major release, which is basically the reason why the talk is called "Where Are We Going?", "How Are We Going?" The reason is that there are only three of us, so the two designers - Andres, we saw earlier this morning, and me as a developer. That's the one bottleneck, of course, that only three of us, and the other thing is that in the past year, we, all three of us have had challenges at work, at home, and so it's been a slow year.

The future plans - when? Soon, as usual. Some things sooner than others. We'll see the roadmap later. We are energized again to put in more power into this project. And it's been great today and yesterday to get so much positive feedback, and the feedback which is not as positive is also positive for us because we can totally use it which is fantastic. Thank you and please come to us if there's anything you want to say.

Funding. Funding is a big topic of course. We don't care so much for money, but we still like it. Over a year ago, end of 2021, we decided to go away from the CCS for some reasons which I'll maybe talk about later, and do our own decentralized funding thing, funding.monerujo.app, where you can see what projects are in the pipeline. So it's the major, major steps - we do all kinds of updates, and UI updates, and stuff like that for free, so to say. But the big things are there. And it's interesting, because we have a subaddress for each project and people can vote with the Monero what should be done next. And when it's funded, it's just like the CCS - we start doing it.

The road map. I don't know how real it is, we'll see, but as of today, we think this is the roadmap. PocketChange, which has been done for 100%, it's something which was funded a year ago, and finally we found the time and design choices and implementation of how to do it.

What's PocketChange about? PocketChange allows us to spend continually. So basically here I can drink a beer every two minutes forever which was not possible the last time I was here - to wait 20 minutes for beer and that was… How it works is part of the presentation. We deployed it a couple of weeks ago on the Alpha channel, and it's been working well. And beginning of this week, we put it up on the main sources of the app, and it seems to work. So I've had a lot of beer, not today.

The other thing which is funded is an "iOS Proof of concept", which is half done. So it's basically a re-implementation of Monerujo in Dart and Flutter, so we can use the same code base for iOS and for Android, which is a bit difficult. It's a lot of work, and this is only a proof of concept to see: okay, how do we deal with this? Am I good enough to code it? What libraries do we need? The whole infrastructure. So a big part of it was of course getting iOS devices and figuring out how they work. The last time I touched Mac was 1990… No, that's wrong - 87. So yeah, a lot has changed. That's still sexy though, so. Yeah. So that's what this is about, and when we finish this, we can see how we continue. I know a lot of people are waiting for it, and yeah, it might happen.

SideKick. SideKick - it's a fantastic project, it's a fantastic idea. It's about using another second Android phone, which runs a special version of Monorujo in SideKick mode. And it enables you to sign transactions just like you would with a Ledger Nano X over Bluetooth, for example. So it also implements the same ledger interface. So you could use this device on any other… if the Monero implementation is fixed, not fixed, but enhanced to use this way over Bluetooth. So you can use it from the normal Monero UI or from the official UI or from any other wallet which can use the Ledger protocol. So that's quite nice. So basically you have some old hardware standing around and you can use that for a wallet. With the advantage, of course, that you don't need to buy Ledger. Not that Ledger's a bad thing, but no one knows that you're actually using it. If you buy a ledger, you're somewhere. And as we all know, lists get leaked of customers of certain companies and here you're using just dock hardware for such a function.

Yeah, this is also 50% done. The reason for that is we tried it out first if it would really work, which we weren't sure about. It does work. We created a CCS funding for this some years ago. And it just took forever to go through this process of whatever at the time was a weird process. Does it really get into the CCS? Would it go up for funding or not? Two things happened. One thing was our time window of having free time left, so that's why it's still not finished. And the other thing is that we decided, okay, the CCS is just not flexible enough, and the community funding process was completely untransparent, and we decided to go our own way. So this is also the reason why we went to do the funding thing ourselves, which is working really well. And yeah, everyone who pays for one of those projects on that site gets a free NFT. Right. So designed and drawn by Andres himself in a style, which is part of the project, which is really beautiful.

What else is in the pipeline? We've been thinking about merchants a lot in the past months and year, year and a half. How do we enable merchants to use Monero easier? What is the standard use case for a merchant? We saw how they use it here. I don't know what's behind it. It seems to work okay outside it stopped working. So they said: "We're not taking it anymore. Just cash or credit, the usual." What we want to do is we want to make a, or at least ideate for now, how can we enable merchants to use Monero better, and what kind of merchants is it for? Monerujo itself is a wallet, is a wallet for the streets, and if it's a wallet for the streets, you want to buy stuff with it, so we're thinking about the other half of this equation.

We have an Exchange Service, which is right now a SideShift, which works most of the time. Some people are not happy with it because of KYC stuff, no Tor possibilities, and maybe a couple of other things, maybe long waits to get your Bitcoin. And so we are re-evaluating how and what to do, probably in the direction of supporting multiple providers so you can choose whatever you like. If you like to use SideShift, use SideShift. I like it. You can go cheap, you can go stable, you can do whatever you want. So we are selecting with checking out the APIs. So there will be a couple of options to have.

And another thing of course is a lot of people say: "Yeah but I want to get Monero from somewhere else, from Bitcoin." So in the direction of incoming exchanges like others do have, is also something we want to do. We want to do it in such a way that it fits to the rest of the app, of course, it's to the ethos of the app, and that the usability doesn't get even worse than it is today. Although I like the usability, so…

So we want to add black market rates for crappy currencies, like Rubles and Pesos from Argentina and stuff like that where the real rate, even if you get it, is just not real. And there are a couple of websites which provide such exchange rates and we want to add that in parallel to the official rates we have. Today the rates are calculated, are taken from the European Central Bank and from Kraken, I think we have right now, to convert to, I don't know, we have like 30 currencies or something. But we need more because it's a wallet for the streets for people who need it, and people in those countries need it. So it would be nice so that they know what it is in their local crappy currency.

PocketChange, I want to talk about PocketChange - about what it is, how it works, and a bit about the implementation. Basically, when you get change back, you know that it takes 10 blocks so that you can spend it again. So our idea is to create 10 pockets where you put a bit of change inside and just spend from these 10 pockets, so that when the change from the first pocket basically comes back, you can keep spending from the other pockets, and then on the 10th one you can spend from the first one again. That's the idea, that's also the idea behind the 10 - "Spend each block forever" is the slogan here. There are some voices that say it should be 16, it should be 2, it should be 13. I don't quite understand, but I have not had the conversation yet about where these numbers come from.

So basically when you enable the PocketChange function, first time you spend to anywhere the wallets is: "Oh, the pockets are empty, let's fill them." So it fills them up with 10, I'm just putting it in the next line, the 10 times the amount that you selected for each pocket. And then when you spend an amount which is under this amount that you selected, it only uses the amount from this pocket. So that's the idea. So you can set it to 0.1 and you can have your beers forever. Or if you want to buy more expensive beer, you set it to 1.3. Why these numbers? Because Fibonacci is cool, I guess. Yeah, so basically the first time you fill up all the pockets, and afterwards you don't, so you'll be just filling up pockets which are empty. Of course you can go up and buy an expensive beer, and then it would probably use outputs from three of these pockets, so the next time you spend it would fill up these three pockets. So it goes up and down depending on your spending habits. How to document and explain this to normal people - we still have to figure out and your input is of course very important and welcome.

We enable this per account. So Monerujo supports accounts for the wallet, so you can have a pocket change account for everyday stuff - for MoneroKon for example and the other accounts are just normal accounts without this pocket change feature. Of course you can turn it on and off at any time. So you go to the conference, you turn it on, you leave the conference, you turn it off, and this doesn't happen, because in the end you have increased fees, because you're always having more transfers than just transfer and change. We have transfer, transfer to a pocket and the change, so the fees are a bit higher.

Yeah, this is "Keep pockets full." We want to make sure as far as there's still, of course, balance in your account, that the pockets are full, so again.

So pockets and subaddresses - that's the implementation part. So basically we pick the first 10 subaddresses as the pockets. Interestingly enough, when we do this and we use these for pockets, the Monero API sort of ignores that, so you don't actually see the incoming transactions into those subaddresses, which is good for us, because then we can ignore everything else and you can use those subaddresses for your own purposes the way you would anyway. And in the background, we use these subaddresses as the pockets.

The reason for that is when you spend, you can select from which subaddresses the coins should come from. You can't select the coins in Monero, at least in the wallet API, you have to say from which subaddresses they come. So we have these pockets and we have some code which figures out which pockets have coins that we can use and then we tell Monero to use exactly those subaddresses, so that we can fulfill the spend request.

The coins interface is stolen from Wownero. Thank you Wownero. So that's something I saw one year ago that they have this. It's very simple code and very useful code which we added and maybe something we add to the Wownero code base as well because you can actually see which coins you have and where they are and without this this would be very difficult or you just have to be guessing if subaddresses have something in them or not.

Yeah. This is how it is. There are discussions and voices about it should be different. Yeah, we can make it different. Let's talk about how to make it different and for what purpose. Right now it's 10 pockets with a selectable amount. Maybe we'll add a feature to add a selectable amount of pockets. I'm not sure if that's an advantage for a user or not. We're open to discussions of any kind, of course, but for now this is how it is, it works. The feedback we've received, especially here, because beer, is positive on this.

The headaches, the current headaches are not a lot, except yeah, but the Cake interface is nicer. Okay, this is not a headache, this is just a factor of life.

This is Orbot integration. The Orbot integration works, even works well, if you know how to use it, which is the pain point, and we need to do some sort of education in this direction, on the one hand, and on the other hand, we should enable a possibility not to use Orbot, but to use your own proxy of whatever kind you like, be it Tor, be it Invisible with I2P or whatever. So for the power users to have the possibility to do whatever they want and for the not power users to touch the button with an appropriate maybe finally we can make a YouTube tutorial which we don't have at all now or maybe one of you can add one of how to use this properly. Yeah, but we should rework that and figure out how to make it usable because Tor is a big thing for a lot of you, and we wanted to work.

Maybe just to add here, we start Orbot. That was a lot of work integrating Orbot. Why don't we have it in the app, the Tor itself, is because it's a security thing, and I don't think that we are capable to stay up to date with all fixes that may happen there. So Orbot should do the heavy lifting for being secure in a network, and we'll do the heavy lifting for being a fantastic Monero wallet.

Downside is the Orbot API does not allow you to shut down Orbot. So when we start Orbot in the app, we can't shut it down so it continues running in the background. There are also different opinions on that, if it should shut down or not, because maybe using Orbot then for something else, and we can't, shouldn't shut it down, because then you go into clear net and bad things may happen. So there's something we need to think about.

The corrupt cache problem - maybe you've seen it very rarely. I think I've seen it once now in all Monerujo time is that you start the wallet and it tells you something like: bad username, password, which has nothing to do with the username, password, but the cache file which is on the phone is just broken. I've tried to debug that, but basically it's just not readable. So it's broken, there's some currency issues. We fixed that a year ago or so to make sure that we don't write the file at the same time. There was some bug, I guess, there. It still happens very, very rarely, so, but why? That's a real headache because you lose your transaction nodes, you lose your subaddress names, stuff like that.

So you should be making backups, which is not on the slides. That's another pain point we have because the backups are encrypted with the Crazypass, which is a super secure password that where it's not very clear that people should write it down, although it's on the secrets page. And with that Crazypass, you can actually use the backup even on a normal Monero client, the official GUI, official command line client, you can use those files there. And you can restore from that on a new phone with the Crazypass, or you can restore from that on the same phone with your normal password.

Yeah, I think that's it. Thank you.
